Build a Secure C# MCP App with Cross-App Access (XAA)- blog (#1670)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2026-07-07-csharp-mcp-cross-app-access.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Build a Secure C# MCP App with Cross-App Access (XAA)"
author: aasawari
by: advocate
communities: [.net]
description: "Learn how to build a secure C# MCP client using Cross-App Access (XAA) and token exchange so AI agents can securely act on behalf of users."

> tags: [csharp, mcp, cross-app-access, xaa, token-exchange, oauth, oidc, asp-net-core]

Reviewer: @aasawariS would you mind removing any new tags you might've injected? also let's align to the existing tags for the xaa stuff (plus any language tags). I'm eyeing `token-exchange` in particular, but not sure `asp-net-core` as well.

tweets:
  - ""
  - ""
  - ""
  - ""
image: blog/csharp-mcp-cross-app-access/social.jpg
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-csharp-mcp-sdk-example
type: conversion
---

> A few years ago, getting a user signed in to an application or multiple applications with single sign-on (SSO) was enough; OpenID Connect (OIDC) handled the login, JWTs carried the claims, and Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) made it secure. Today, with evolving AI, agents act on behalf of users and seek multiple accesses across different resources to execute a task. And that is when you will hit the gap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few years ago, getting a user signed in to an application or multiple applications with single sign-on (SSO) was enough; OpenID Connect (OIDC) handled the login, JWTs carried the claims, and Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) made it secure. Today, with evolving AI, agents act on behalf of users and seek multiple accesses across different resources to execute a task. And that is when you'll hit the gap.
```

Reviewer: Our style guidelines state to prefer contractions

> The user has an identity, but the downstream service—like a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server, an API, or an agent tool—has no way to trust it: the ID Token that proves the user's identity for your app, not for that service. You need a way to take that identity and have it trusted further down the chain, in line with the org's policy, without asking the user to log in again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user has an identity, but the downstream service—like a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server, an API, or an agent tool has no way to trust it: the ID Token that proves the user's identity for your app, not for that service. You need a way to take that identity and have it trusted further down the chain, in line with the org's policy, without asking the user to log in again.
```

Reviewer: I think this is a typo? I don't see the need for a dash. And if you do use a dash, please ensure you use an en dash with spaces, per our style guide

> Cross-app access (XAA) solves exactly that. The user authenticates once. The Identity Provider (IdP) evaluates the enterprise policy and issues a signed Identity Assertion. The downstream service exchanges that assertion for a scoped Bearer token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cross App Access (XAA) solves exactly that. The user authenticates once. The Identity Provider (IdP) evaluates the enterprise policy and issues a signed Identity Assertion. The downstream service exchanges that assertion for a scoped Bearer token.
```

> In this post, we'll explore how Cross-App Access (XAA) closes the trust gap, test the flow using xaa.dev, and implement a secure MCP client in just a few lines of C# using our dedicated SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we'll explore how Cross App Access (XAA) closes the trust gap, test the flow using xaa.dev, and implement a secure MCP client in just a few lines of C# using our dedicated SDK.
```

Please update your Grammarly or something

> ## What is Cross-App Access (XAA)?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What is Cross App Access (XAA)?
```

Reviewer 2: Please format XAA to Cross App Access no dash.

Reviewer 2: We've done Grammarly edits on GDoc before this PR. So most of the cleanup was there.

Reviewer: @isemona i am finding a lot of naming issues throughout the doc. might want to re-evaluate the Grammarly process??

Reviewer 2: @alisaduncan fixed on Grammarly knowledge share added Cross App Access and XAA https://support.grammarly.com/hc/en-us/articles/16664924710797-Introducing-Knowledge-Share#h_01H2QJKG4W7R40EPVK6FSS1GGK, but new ppl can write Cross-App and add it to the knowledge base still so we need to catch this in the content review skill perhaps.

> Before we start implementing and building the application, it is important to understand the mechanics of Cross-App Access (XAA). At its core, XAA is an open standard that securely enables AI agents to act on behalf of a user and communicate with downstream applications without requiring constant, manual user consent.

Reviewer: Please fix all instances of Cross-App Access.

While the flow is sophisticated, it relies on two standard interactions:

1. RFC 8693 (Token Exchange): The requesting app exchanges an OIDC ID token for a JWT Authorization Grant (JAG) at the enterprise Identity Provider.
2. RFC 7523 (JWT Bearer Grant): The app presents this JAG to the MCP authorization server to receive a scoped access token for the resource.

The diagram below gives a complete flow for XAA and token exchanges.

{% img blog/csharp-mcp-cross-app-access/xaa-flow-diagram.jpg alt:"XAA flow diagram showing the four steps: OIDC login, token exchange via RFC 8693, JWT bearer grant via RFC 7523, and MCP server access" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> You can find a complete flow diagram and explanation of XAA in the ["Integrate Your Enterprise AI Tools with Cross-App Access"](/blog/2025/06/23/enterprise-ai) blog.

Reviewer: @isemona do you want to consider changing the name of your post??? (then we'd update it here too?) i know your post came out before the naming standard.

var transport = new HttpClientTransport(new HttpClientTransportOptions
{
    Endpoint          = new Uri(config["Xaa:McpServerUrl"]!),
    TransportMode     = HttpTransportMode.StreamableHttp,
    AdditionalHeaders = new Dictionary<string, string>
    {
        ["Authorization"] = $"Bearer {accessToken}"
    }
});

// Initialize the MCP client
await using var client = await McpClient.CreateAsync(transport);
```

`McpClient.CreateAsync` performs the MCP initialization handshake, exchanging the protocol version and capabilities with the server before making any resource request. From here on, interacting with the server is straightforward.

```csharp
var resources = await client.ListResourcesAsync(); //lists all the available URIs
var result    = await client.ReadResourceAsync("todo0://todos");

var raw = string.Join("",
    result.Contents
          .OfType<TextResourceContents>()
          .Select(c => c.Text ?? ""));
```

This app uses `todo0://todos` to fetch from the xaa.dev resource server. The complete sample code for the app is available in the linked [GitHub repository](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-csharp-mcp-sdk-example).

> ## Testing with xaa.dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Testing your C# MCP app with xaa.dev
```

throw in some keywrods? :)

> Now that we understand the XAA flow, it is time to test it. [xaa.dev](https://xaa.dev) is a testing playground. It provides a standardized, functional environment that lets you verify your end-to-end flow immediately, acting as the bridge between your app and the downstream resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we've stepped through the XAA flow, it is time to test it. [xaa.dev](https://xaa.dev) is a testing playground. It provides a standardized, functional environment that lets you verify your end-to-end flow immediately, acting as the bridge between your app and the downstream resource.
```

more inclusive

To test out the application using the xaa.dev platform, follow the steps below to get the app registered as the requester app:

1. Go to [xaa.dev](https://xaa.dev) and select the **Register, test, and manage your requesting app** tab, then select **Continue with your app**.
2. Enter your email and click on **Continue** and **Register New App**.
3. Enter the Redirect URI and Post-logout URI as below.
4. Click on the **Add Resource** section and select **ToDo MCP Server**.
5. Click on **Register App**, and your app is now registered as a requester app in the XAA flow.

You should have your connections set up like in the screenshot below.

{% img blog/csharp-mcp-cross-app-access/xaa-dev-register-app.jpg alt:"xaa.dev Register New App screen showing redirect URIs, resource connections, and todos.read and mcp.access scopes" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

In this example, the C# app is a requester app that fetches the To-Do list from the ToDo app and analyzes the tasks fetched.

> ## Executing with xaa.dev

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run your C# MCP app with xaa.dev
```

??  i don't know what this section header means

```shell
dotnet run
```

Go to `http://localhost:5000/`, and you should see the app.

{% img blog/csharp-mcp-cross-app-access/app-login-screen.jpg alt:"AI Productivity Assistant app home screen with a Continue with Enterprise SSO button" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Sign in to the app using a test email and provide a random verification code as below. Once you sign in, the XAA playground handles the login request; you can verify this by checking the URL on your screen.

{% img blog/csharp-mcp-cross-app-access/verify-identity-screen.jpg alt:"Verify Your Identity screen showing a 6-digit code entry field with a demo mode notice to enter any 6 digits" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Once done, you should see the analyzer app running the XAA flow, displaying all details and analyzing all To-Do tasks.

{% img blog/csharp-mcp-cross-app-access/app-dashboard.jpg alt:"AI Productivity Assistant dashboard showing completed XAA auth flow steps, the access token, token claims, and a to-do task list" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

The MCP SDK and XAA simplify building and testing cross-app access.

> ## What's next

Reviewer: Always work in headers. A section header such as "What's next" really doesn't contribute to the post. It doesn't help with the TOC (much), and it doesn't help with SEO.
